# ADR-0002: Required Fields for Creation and Update of Entities Breaks the Frontend

| <!-- -->       | <!-- --> |
|----------------|----------|
| **Status**:    | PROPOSED |
| **Date**:      | 2021-12-13 |
| **Author(s)**: | Sven Strittmatter <sven.strittmatter@iteratec.com> |

## Context

We introduced the fields `createdAt` and `updatedAt` in some of the model's entities in the JHipsters JDL file as
required fields. We want to use these fields for basic auditing of data manipulation. These fields should be
automatically set by the backend and *must not* be changed via frontend through the REST API. But JHipster generates all
code for all layers with these fields as required. This results in DTO classes (used to exchange data between REST API
and frontend) with such fields with not null validator annotations. This results in validation exceptions if such a DTO
is sent from the frontend without these fields set. JDL does not support to only require these fields in the entities
and make them nullable in the DTO at the same time.

## Decision

- We remove the `@NotNull` annotation from the DTO fields `createdAt` and `updatedAt`.
- We extend the `save()` method of all services dealing with such DTOs as described in [ADR 0001](./adr_0001.md) to
  automatically set these fields:
    - The field `createdAt` will be set with current date time if the corresponding entity does not exist, otherwise the
      value from the data repository is used.
    - The field `updatedAt` will be set with current date time every time the entity is stored into the data repository.

## Consequences

- We have custom changes in every DTO class with these two fields and must be especially careful to not overwrite these
  custom changes, if we regenerate the code from JDL.
- We have to do one additional query on the data repository to lookup, if a particular entity already exists and what
  value for `createdAt` is has. We consider this performance penalty no issue because entities are not updated that much
  and no expensive queries like joins will be made. 
